---
layout: post
title:  "Language Bases - 2 (Nouns I)"
date:   2024-02-21 13:32:00 -0500
categories: [bases]
tags: [nouns, vowels, pronunciation, the, a, person, object, plural]

---
# Nouns

Let's define a few useful simple nouns

* `kaz` -> Home/House
* `rod` -> Road
* `toz` -> House
* `bild` -> Building
* `skol` -> School
* `fis` -> Office
* `stor` -> Commerce
* `magazin` -> Supermarket / Large commerce
* `mol` -> Mall
* `strit` -> Street
* `skel` -> Sky
* `sol` -> Sun
* `dog` -> Dog
* `kat` -> Cat

### A quick note on pronounciation

As for `H` mentioned earlier, we're targeting a simple pronounciation.
For that matter, there's no variation on the sounds of letters, or any
variation is irrelevant to the meaning, so that accents won't be a problem.

The vowel sounds will be `a` [ah], `e` [ay], `i` [ee], `o` [oh], `u` [u].

We should also avoid any [diphthong][diphthong], that may be
harder to pronounce for some people. In simpler terms, don't
use two vowels in sequence.

The number of consecutive consonants will also be limited to
two, also for practicality.

[diphthong]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Diphthong

### Practical considerations

Nouns will **always** start and end with a consonant.

## Plural

The plural of nouns should be simple and guessable. We'll use the letter `e` for that.

* `kaz` -> `kaze` [kazay]
* `rod` -> `rode` [roday]
* `toz` -> `toze` [tozay]
* `bild` -> `bilde` [bilday]
* `skol` -> `skole` [skolay]
* `fis` -> `fise` [fissay]
* `dog` -> `doge` [dogay]
* `kat` -> `kate` [catay]
* ...

For that reason, nouns should not finish in `e` in singular form.
Similarly, due to the special meaning of `i` (person) and `o` (object),
nouns should not end with these letters, unless specifically
designing a person or an object/animal.

## Examples

* `im av toz` -> I have a house
* `it be skol` -> he or she is (at) school
* `to be kaz` -> they (objects/animals) are (at) home

Note that, similarly to English, we don't need to use a preposition for
"at".

That will lead to our next chapter on sentences.